
o-iko na e-ko pa õt
1S-food VERBZLR 2S-ingest FUT I
'You will be my food, I will eat you'


poret sete pɨɨp te se-eit te kwaõt
now he/she/it burst FOC 3c-belly FOC fox
'Then it burst, the fox's belly'


õr o-mi-a õt
I 1S-shoot/kil-Them I
'I shot myself'


se-sereka-t sete
3c-cut.Them-Past he/she
'He cut himself'


e-mi-a ẽt
2S-shoot/kill-Them you
'You shot yourself'


o-akop õt
1S-hot I
'I am hot'


mi-ap
kill-NMLZR
'arrow or gun' (lit. 'an instrument that kills')


o-ike otat poka-ap oetobeka-pit ar-a-t
1S-brother fire burn-NMLZR get-them-past
'My brother found the lost lighter'

Reduplication and compounding are the two other processes of stem formation/alteration found in Mekéns, the process of reduplication being productive with verbs, however also registered in noun formation. Reduplication takes place through the reduplication of the entire verb stem. Any verb stem may be reduplicated to indicate iterative meaning, the way in which an event is performed, or simple repetition. An example of reduplication is that of the adjective stem in the noun “paak-paak” (meaning “heron”), with the word “paak” meaning “white”.

In compounding, two or more existing words are combined to form a new word. This occurs when verb and noun stems are formed, and includes cases of noun incorporation (28). Complex or composite words are formed through the addition of up to three lexical stems (105). In Example 6, the two words “kimakãy” “soil” and “yẽẽt” “ashes” are combined to produce one word “dust”.


kimakãy-yẽẽt
soil ashes
'dust'


se-er-a-t
3c-sleep-THEM-past
‘He slept’


kɨrɨt mo-er-a-t
child CAU-sleep-THEM-past
‘He made the child sleep’


o-so-a-t
1s-see-THEM-past
'He saw me'


o-õ-so-a-t
1S-CAU-see-THEM-past
'He showed me (to someone)' (Txt)


s-ese-pɨbor-a-ra õt
3s-COM-arrive-THEM-Resum I
'I arrived again bringing it'/'I arrived again with it'


kobo perop
bean cooked
‘cooked beans’


kobo perop-ka-t
beans cooked-TR-past
‘he/she cooked the beans’


ŋwãẽ pɨɨk
pan black
‘black pan’


o-pɨɨk-kwa-ra
1S-black-TR+PL-REP
‘(He/she) completely painted me black again'


apara saro
banana yellow
‘Ripe banana’


se-e-saro-ka te apara
3c-Intrvzr-yellow-TR- FOC banana
‘The bananas are getting ripe’


ŋwɑ̃ẽ poor
pan old
"the old pans"


ŋwɑ̃ẽ poot no
pan old other
"other old pans"


ŋwɑ̃ẽ no poot
pan other old
"other old pans"


pebo paak no
wing white other
“other white (bird) wings


arẽp pagop-taɨp [kwerep pagop taɨb] se=poroka t õet te s-ike arop firmino pɨɨk [kwerep pɨɨg]
then young-make non.indian young-male 3c-die.Them guess FOC 3S-older.brother that Firmino black non.indian black
'Then he was a young guy, one of the non-indian young guys, I don't know whether he died or not, his brother, Firmino, one of the non-indian black guys.'


se-no mi-kwa pããt
3c-other kill-PL like
'He likes to kill others'


seteyat-set se-teg-õ kwa i-et i-et
3PL-go 3c-house-DAT go/come.PL.SUBJ 3-AUX.in.motion.PL
'They left, they are going home/to their own house'

With auxiliaries, the plurality of their argument is expressed with the clitic “-iat”. In examples 3A and 3B, the third personal plural is implied, although there is no indication of person after the auxiliary-plural word (Galucio: 2001, 60). When there is no marking for person in transitive verb stems, this indicates the third person. Furthermore, as seen in example 3B, when other overt plural markers are present, the third personal singular coreferential prefix takes a plural reference (Galucio: 2001, 61). In example 3C, there is no marking of person in neither the lexical verb nor the auxiliary; the person/number of the argument is indicated only by the use of morpheme “-iat”, which is suffixed to the auxiliary. The sentence is therefore interpreted as having a third-person plural subject. Moving to example 3D, the sentence has a first person plural subject, seen after the “-iat” morpheme.


teyat-er-a  naat tob
3P-sleep-Them ? AUX.lying
'They are already sleeping'


se-er-a  naat tob
3c-sleep-Them ? AUX.lying
'They are already sleeping'


tɟero ma  naat kob
chicha make ? AUX.moving
'They are making chicha’


tɨero ma  naat kob
chicha make ? AUX.moving
'We (excl) are making chicha'