
Βλέπεις εκείνο το κούτσουρο; Θα ήταν καλό για τη φωτιά. Είναι τελείως ξερό.
see.2sg that the log? Would be.3sg good for the fire. be.pres.3sg completely dried
(You) see this log? (It) would be good for the fire. (It) has completely dried.

¿Ves este tronco? Sería bueno para la fogata. Está completamente seco.
See this log? Would be good for the campfire. Is completely dry
(Do) (you) see this log? (It) would be good for the campfire. (It) is completely dry


Salimos
left
“We left.”


Nosotros salimos.
We       left
“We left.”


Yo [y no tú u otra persona] creo que eso estuvo mal.
I [and not you or another person] think that that was wrong.


Subject pronouns can also be made explicit in order to clarify ambiguities that arise due to verb forms that are homophonous in the first person and third person. For example, in the past imperfect, conditional, and the subjunctive, the verb forms are the same for first person singular and third person singular. In these situations, using the explicit pronoun ''yo'' (1st person singular) or ''él, ella'' (3rd person singular) clarifies who the subject is, since the verbal morphology is ambiguous.


Vedi questo tronco? Andrebbe bene per bruciare. È completamente secco.
See this log? Would go well for burning. Is completely dry
Do (you) see this log? (It) would be fit for burning. (It) is completely dry.


Chegaram.
arrived-3PL
‘They have arrived.’


Estás a ver este tronco? Seria bom para a fogueira. Secou completamente.c1=(European Portuguese)
Are to see this log? Would be good for the campfire. Dried completely
(Do) (you) see this log? (It) would be good for the campfire. (It) has completely dried.


Está(s) vendo esse tronco? Seria bom pra fogueira. Secou completamente.c1=(Brazilian Portuguese)
Are seeing this log? Would be good for-the campfire. Dried completely
(Do) (you) see this log? (It) would be good for the campfire. (It) has completely dried. 


Acho que ele vai rejeitar a proposta, mas pode aceitar.
Think that he goes (to-)reject the proposal, but may accept.
(I) think he is going to turn down the proposal, but (he) may accept (it).


Ainda tem macarrão? Não, papai comeu.
Still is there pasta? No, daddy ate.
Is there pasta left? No, daddy ate (it).


Ela me procurou ontem e não achou.
She me sought yesterday and not found.
She looked for me yesterday and didn't find (me).


A: Eu te amo; você também me ama? B: Amo, sim.
no glossA: I you love; you too me love?  no glossB: Love-1sg, yes.
A: I love you; do you love me too? B: I do.


Viu que bonito? Não gosta? Pode comprar?c1= (BP)
Saw how beautiful? Don't like? Can buy?c2= (using polite 2nd person) (BP)



Viste que bonito? Não gostas? Podes comprar?c1= (EP)
Saw how beautiful? Don't like? Can buy?c2= (using informal 2nd person) (EP)
Have you seen how beautiful it is? Do you like it? Can you buy it?



ساعد غيرك، يساعدك
sāʻid ghayrak, yusāʻiduk.
Help other, help.PST.3SG you
If (you) help another, (he) helps you.


Sen-i gör-dü-m
2SG-ACC see-PAST-1SG
(I) saw you.


Gel-diğ-im-i gör-dü-n mü?
come-NMLZ-POSS.1SG-ACC see-PAST-2SG Q
Did you see me coming?


Sen ben-im gel-diğ-im-i gör-dü-n mü?
2SG 1SG-POSS come-"ing"-POSS.1SG-ACC see-PAST-2SG Q
Did ''you'' see ''me'' coming?



Ni-ta-ku-saidia.
Ni- -ta- -ku- -saidia.
SUBJ.1SG- -FUT- -OBJ.2SG- -help
(I) will help (you).